[MISC] Adding documentation for AWS and Azure deployment (#256)
canonical/kafka-operator: docs/how-to/h-deploy-aws.md

# How to deploy on AWS

[Amazon Web Services](https://aws.amazon.com/) is a popular subsidiary of Amazon that provides on-demand cloud computing platforms on a metered pay-as-you-go basis. Access the AWS web console at [console.aws.amazon.com](https://console.aws.amazon.com/).

## Summary
* [Install AWS and Juju tooling](#install-aws-and-juju-tooling)
  * [Authenticate](#authenticate)
* [Bootstrap Juju controller on AWS EC2](#bootstrap-juju-controller-on-aws-ec2)
* [Deploy charms](#deploy-charms)
* [Clean up](#clean-up)

> ---

Reviewer: I introduced this element to the SQL docs for a few reasons - will take this discussion offline with @izmalk . I don't think it should block the merging of this PR.

> ---

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion for now, but this is a workaround for the absence of in-page navigation in our Discourse.

## Install AWS and Juju tooling

Install Juju via snap:
```shell
sudo snap install juju
```

Follow the installation guides for:
* [AWs CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html) - the Amazon Web Services CLI

To check they are all correctly installed, you can run the commands demonstrated below with sample outputs:

```console
~$ juju version
3.5.4-genericlinux-amd64

~$ aws --version
aws-cli/2.13.25 Python/3.11.5 Linux/6.2.0-33-generic exe/x86_64.ubuntu.23 prompt/off
```
### Authenticate

> [Create an IAM account](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/getting-started-console.html) (or use legacy access keys) to operate AWS EC2:

Author: Both should work and provide an access key and a secret key

Add AWS credentials to Juju:
```shell
juju add-credential aws -f ~/.aws/credentials.yaml
```
Bootstrap Juju controller ([check all supported configuration options](https://juju.is/docs/juju/amazon-ec2)):
```shell
juju bootstrap aws <CONTROLLER_NAME>
```
[details="Output example"]
```shell
> juju bootstrap aws
Creating Juju controller "aws-us-east-1" on aws/us-east-1
Looking for packaged Juju agent version 3.5.4 for amd64
Located Juju agent version 3.5.4-ubuntu-amd64 at https://juju-dist-aws.s3.amazonaws.com/agents/agent/3.5.4/juju-3.5.4-linux-amd64.tgz
Launching controller instance(s) on aws/us-east-1...
 - i-0f4615983d113166d (arch=amd64 mem=8G cores=2)           
Installing Juju agent on bootstrap instance
Waiting for address
Attempting to connect to 54.226.221.6:22
Attempting to connect to 172.31.20.34:22
Connected to 54.226.221.6
Running machine configuration script...
Bootstrap agent now started
Contacting Juju controller at 54.226.221.6 to verify accessibility...

Bootstrap complete, controller "aws-us-east-1" is now available
Controller machines are in the "controller" model

Now you can run
	juju add-model <model-name>
to create a new model to deploy workloads.
```

> [/details]

Author: I took it from PostgreSQL so I would suppose it is, actually

You can check the [AWS EC2 instance availability](https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:instanceState=running) (ensure the right AWS region chosen!):

> ![image|690x118](upload://putAO5NyHdaeWE6jXI8X1hZHTYv.png)

Author: Uhm, the asset manager gives me 403, permission denied. But also, if the asset manager works with authentication, I'm not sure how this works when integrated with Discourse. 

Do you know what is the recommended way to include images in our documentation?

## Deploy charms

Create a new Juju model, if needed:
```shell
juju add-model <MODEL_NAME>
```
> (Optional) Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:
> ```shell
> juju model-config logging-config='<root>=INFO;unit=DEBUG'

> > ```

Author: The idea would be to provide a box in the documentation, kinda used for things like warnings, disclaimers, etc, things you would like to box and to highlight. 

Sometimes there are cases where this can be nice to have. Maybe worth discussing with @a-velasco if we - as DataPlatform - should advocate against it or in which cases we should use this

> > ```

Reviewer 2: OK, that's called admonition. Sometimes we use quotation to do a simple admonition, for example:
```
> **NOTE**: This is a noteworthy admonition.
```
But ideally, we should use a proper syntax, which should work better for more complicated admonitions with multiple elements in it, like code blocks. For example:
```
[note type="caution"]
Always clean AWS resources that are no longer necessary! Abandoned resources are tricky to detect and they can become expensive over time.
[/note]
```

Then, Charmed Kafka can be deployed as usual. However, note that the smallest instance types on Azure may not have enough resources for hosting 
a Kafka broker. We therefore recommend you to select some types that provides at the very least 8GB of RAM and 4 cores, although for production use-case
we recommend you to use the guidance provided in the [requirement page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563). You can find more information about 
the available instance types in the [Azure web page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes/overview). 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Deploy and integrate Kafka and ZooKeepe, for example:

```

```shell
juju deploy zookeeper -n3 --channel 3/stable
juju deploy kafka -n3 --constraints "instance-type=Standard_A4_v2" --channel 3/stable
juju integrate kafka zookeeper
```

We also recommend to deploy a [Data Integrator](https://charmhub.io/data-integrator) for creating an admin user to manage the content of the Kafka cluster:

```shell

> juju deploy data-integrator admin --channel edge \

Author: no, not really. I'll remove the edge

  --config extra-user-roles=admin \
  --config topic-name=admin-topic
```

And integrate it with the Kafka application:

```shell
juju integrate kafka admin
```

For more information on Data Integrator and how to use it, please refer to the [how-to manage applications](/t/charmed-kafka-how-to-manage-app/10285) user guide.

## Clean up

[note type="caution"]
Always clean AWS resources that are no longer necessary -  they could be costly!
[/note]

To destroy the Juju controller and remove AWS instance (warning: all your data will be permanently removed):
```shell
> juju controllers
Controller      Model  User   Access     Cloud/Region   Models  Nodes    HA  Version
aws-us-east-1*  -      admin  superuser  aws/us-east-1       1      1  none  3.5.4  

> > juju destroy-controller aws-us-east-1 --destroy-all-models --destroy-storage --force

Author: I suppose the idea here is that you can list the controllers, if you have forgotten the name. But I agree, the output seems a bit too verbose

Launching controller instance(s) on aws/us-east-1...
 - i-0f4615983d113166d (arch=amd64 mem=8G cores=2)           
Installing Juju agent on bootstrap instance
Waiting for address
Attempting to connect to 54.226.221.6:22
Attempting to connect to 172.31.20.34:22
Connected to 54.226.221.6
Running machine configuration script...
Bootstrap agent now started
Contacting Juju controller at 54.226.221.6 to verify accessibility...

Bootstrap complete, controller "aws-us-east-1" is now available
Controller machines are in the "controller" model

Now you can run
	juju add-model <model-name>
to create a new model to deploy workloads.
```
[/details]

## Deploy charms

Create a new Juju model, if needed:

```shell
juju add-model <MODEL_NAME>
```

[note type="caution"]
(Optional) Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:
```shell
juju model-config logging-config='<root>=INFO;unit=DEBUG'
```
[/note]

Deploy and integrate Kafka and ZooKeeper:

```shell
juju deploy zookeeper -n3 --channel 3/stable [--constraints "instance-type=<INSTANCE_TYPE>"] 
juju deploy kafka -n3 --channel 3/stable [--constraints "instance-type=<INSTANCE_TYPE>"]
juju integrate kafka zookeeper
```

> [note type="caution"]
> Note that the smallest instance types on AWS may not have enough resources for hosting 
> a Kafka broker. We recommend selecting an instance type that provides at the very least 8 GB of RAM and 4 cores, e.g. `m7i.xlarge`.
> For more guidance on production environment sizing, see the [Requirements page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563).
> You can find more information about the available instance types in the [AWS documentation](https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:instanceState=running), 
> ensuring that you select the correct AWS.
> [/note]

Reviewer 2: Suggested wording improvements:
```suggestion
[note type="caution"]
The smallest AWS instance types may not provide sufficient resources to host a Kafka broker. We recommend choosing an instance type with a minimum of 8 GB of RAM and 4 CPU cores, such as `m7i.xlarge`.

For more guidance on sizing production environments, see the [Requirements page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563). Additional information about AWS instance types is available in the [AWS documentation](https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:instanceState=running).
[/note]
```

# How to deploy on AWS

[Amazon Web Services](https://aws.amazon.com/) is a popular subsidiary of Amazon that provides on-demand cloud computing platforms on a metered pay-as-you-go basis. Access the AWS web console at [console.aws.amazon.com](https://console.aws.amazon.com/).

## Summary

* [Install AWS and Juju tooling](#install-aws-and-juju-tooling)
  * [Authenticate](#authenticate)
* [Bootstrap Juju controller on AWS EC2](#bootstrap-juju-controller-on-aws-ec2)
* [Deploy charms](#deploy-charms)
* [Clean up](#clean-up)

---

## Install AWS and Juju tooling

Install Juju via snap:

```shell

> sudo snap install juju

Reviewer 3: should we suggest a track here?

```

Follow the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html) for guidance on how to install the Amazon Web Services CLI.

To check whether both Juju and AWS CLI are correctly installed, run commands to display their versions:

```console
~$ juju version
3.5.4-genericlinux-amd64

~$ aws --version
aws-cli/2.13.25 Python/3.11.5 Linux/6.2.0-33-generic exe/x86_64.ubuntu.23 prompt/off
```

### Authenticate

[Create an IAM account](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/getting-started-console.html) or use legacy user access keys and secret key to operate AWS EC2:

```shell
mkdir -p ~/.aws && cat <<- EOF >  ~/.aws/credentials.yaml
credentials:
  aws:
    NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL:
      auth-type: access-key
      access-key: SECRET_ACCESS_KEY_ID
      secret-key: SECRET_ACCESS_KEY_VALUE
EOF
```

> <!--- TODO, teach Juju to use `aws configure` format:

Reviewer 3: remove this comment

Bootstrap complete, controller "aws-us-east-1" is now available
Controller machines are in the "controller" model

Now you can run
	juju add-model <model-name>
to create a new model to deploy workloads.
```
[/details]

## Deploy charms

Create a new Juju model, if needed:

```shell
juju add-model <MODEL_NAME>
```

[note type="caution"]
(Optional) Increase the debug level if you are troubleshooting charms:
```shell
juju model-config logging-config='<root>=INFO;unit=DEBUG'
```
[/note]

Then, Charmed Kafka can be deployed as usual. However, note that the smallest instance types on AWS may not have enough resources for hosting 
a Kafka broker. We recommend selecting an instance type that provides at the very least 8 GB of RAM and 4 cores.
For more guidance on production environment sizing, see the [Requirements page](/t/charmed-kafka-reference-requirements/10563).
You can find more information about the available instance types in the [AWS documentation](https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=us-east-1#Instances:instanceState=running), 
ensuring that you select the correct AWS.

Deploy and integrate Kafka and ZooKeeper, for example:

```shell

> juju deploy zookeeper -n3 --channel 3/stable

Reviewer 3: should we suggest an instance type appropriate for ZooKeeper?

juju deploy kafka -n3 --constraints "instance-type=m7i.xlarge" --channel 3/stable
juju integrate kafka zookeeper
```

We also recommend to deploy a [Data Integrator](https://charmhub.io/data-integrator) for creating an admin user to manage the content of the Kafka cluster:

```shell
juju deploy data-integrator admin \
  --config extra-user-roles=admin \
  --config topic-name=admin-topic
```

And integrate it with the Kafka application:

```shell
juju integrate kafka admin
```

For more information on Data Integrator and how to use it, please refer to the [how-to manage applications](/t/charmed-kafka-how-to-manage-app/10285) guide.

## Clean up

[note type="caution"]

> Always clean AWS resources that are no longer necessary! Abandoned resources are tricky to detect and they can become expensive over time.

Reviewer 3: rephrase to "Always **terminate** AWS resources..."

Reviewer 2: Sorry, but "terminate" is in our [style guide](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en#words-and-phrases-to-avoid)'s list of avoided terms. We should try to avoid it if we can. Some of the available synonyms are: destroy, delete, remove, and free up.

[/note]

To list all controllers use the `juju controllers` command.

To destroy the Juju controller and remove AWS instance (**Warning**: all your data will be permanently deleted):

```shell

> juju destroy-controller <CONTROLLER_NAME> --destroy-all-models --destroy-storage --force

Reviewer 3: this command is known to hang indefinitely unless a timeout is specified. By default, there is no timeout. Specify the command with a timeout of 5 minutes.

Author: Not really, I generally use this command with no issues. Sometimes it may hangs when it tries to clear some resources (especially on K8s) when some resources hangs on deletion. But it is still good that it keeps on trying. While the process runs, I also (in a different shell) delete resource manually to get the process unstuck and resume. I would not nudge away to use timeout (why wouldn't we go with the default provided by juju?), user forgetting (or thinking everything is fine) then having resources hanging

 
```shell
aws ec2 describe-instances --region us-east-1 --query "Reservations[].Instances[*].{InstanceType: InstanceType, InstanceId: InstanceId, State: State.Name}" --output table
```

[details="Output example"]
```shell
-------------------------------------------------------
|                  DescribeInstances                  |
+---------------------+----------------+--------------+
|     InstanceId      | InstanceType   |    State     |
+---------------------+----------------+--------------+
|  i-0f374435695ffc54c|  m7i.xlarge    |  terminated  |
|  i-0e1e8279f6b2a08e0|  m7i.xlarge    |  terminated  |
|  i-061e0d10d36c8cffe|  m7i.xlarge    |  terminated  |
|  i-0f4615983d113166d|  m7i.xlarge    |  terminated  |
+---------------------+----------------+--------------+
```
[/details]

List your Juju credentials with the `juju credentials` command:

```shell
...
Client Credentials:
Cloud        Credentials
aws          NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
...
```
Remove AWS EC2 CLI credentials from Juju:

```shell
juju remove-credential aws NAME_OF_YOUR_CREDENTIAL
```

> Finally, remove AWS CLI user credentials (to avoid forgetting and leaking):

Reviewer 3: alternativevly, you could show the user how to delete the credentials or rotate them in the AWS web console.

Author: I have refactored this part. Please re-review
